+++
title="Rust 2021 Roadmap Wishlist"
date=2020-09-24
+++

The core team sent out a
[call for blog posts to inspire the roadmap for the 2021 edition](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2020/09/03/Planning-2021-Roadmap.html).
Originally, I wasn't going to write a post because I'm a college student with
too much homework, but I decided to make time anyway, and write up my opinion.

<!-- more -->

# Match Statements
Match statements are my favorite feature of Rust (by far).  Doesn't mean they
can't be improved though.  Someone who is unfamiliar with Rust might write:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut a = 4;
    match 5 {
        a => unreachable!(),
        b => println!("{}", b),
    }
}
```

This code panics (which I still get confused about, despite having written a lot
of Rust).  You need to use an `if` inside of the match:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut a = 4;
    match 5 {
        x if x == a => unreachable!(),
        b => println!("{}", b),
    }
}
```

Which is clear and easy to read, but the first code chunk is a perfectly
logical guess as to how these statements work.  There is syntactic ambiguity
in the Rust language that causes the compiler to not help you.  Declaring a
local identifier and matching on a literal or pre-existing identifier (excluding
local variables) uses the exact same syntax.  And this is not the only situation
where it causes problems.  Take the following example:

```rust
enum KeyboardKey {
    Escape,
    F1,
    F2,
    F3,
    // …
}

use KeyboardKey::*;
match key {
    F1 => { /* … */ }
    F2 => { /* … */ }
    F3 => { /* … */ }
    Escap => { /* … */ } // Forgot the 'e' on Escape, now this is a catch-all
    k => { /* … */ }     // and this is unreachable
}
```

It drives me crazy that this compiles.  I make this mistake all of the time.  I
know it prints warnings, but if you're at a point in the development process
where you too many warnings to look through, it's hard to pinpoint why your code
doesn't work.  And, looking at it, it may not be clear what the issue is.

Instead, an edition-breaking-change should be made - to create a local
identifier or catch-all you **must** use `let` (being consistent with the rest
of the language, besides function parameters).  I would write this code instead
(And the compiler would throw an error that `Escap` is not the name of an
identifier in scope):

```
/* … */

use KeyboardKey::*;
match key {
    F1 => { /* … */ }
    F2 => { /* … */ }
    F3 => { /* … */ }
    Escap => { /* … */ }
    let k => { /* … */ }
}
```

Now there is a syntactical difference between the second-to-last and last match
arms.  This makes it easy for the compiler to throw an error when the code is
wrong, and I'd argue it's easier to read.  I think this change should follow the
same path as the `dyn` keyword.  Not using `dyn` is deprecated in the 2018
edition, and will likely turn into an error in the 2021 edition.  Not using
`let` in this situation should be deprecated in the 2021 edition and turned into
an error in the 2024 edition.  Semantic differences like this should have their
own syntax, and I think this follows the same mentality set by `if let`
statements.  A more complicated example might be:

```rust
let a: u32 = /* … */;
match a {
    let x if x.count_ones() == 1 => { /* … */ }
    0 => { /* … */ }
    let non_power_of_two_or_zero => { /* … */ }
}
```

What an `match` statement that should really be turned into an `if let`
statement would look like:

```
match option {
    // `let` would be inserted before `value`.
    Some(let value) => { /* use `value` identifier */ }
    None => { /* … */ }
}
```

## Bonus
I would also appreciate not having to add use statements immediately above all
my match statements.  But, I consider what I've outlined above more important to
actually solving a real problem with match statements.

```rust
enum Enum {
    A,
    B,
}

let var: Enum = /* … */;

// An implicit `use Enum::*;` for the match statement
match var {
    A => { /* except that A and B are out of scope here */ }
    B => { /* and here */ }
}
```

# `#[macro_use]`
`#[macro_use]` should be completely removed from the language.  Macros should
follow the exact same import scheme as other public items.  It's too confusing
having multiple ways to do it, and it's obvious that Rust is moving in this
direction (after the 2018 edition changes), so let's get it over with!

# `as`
Similary, the `as` keyword should be completely removed from the language.
Enums without associated data, and assigned numeric values should automatically
implement `Into` and `TryFrom` for their `repr` types.  This would make dealing
with enum and integer conversions insanely easier in many situations.

# Async Closures
[Rust Issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/62290)

I would like to be able to pass async closures as literal parameters.

```rust
some_function(async |/* … */| { /* … */ });
```

# Features
Features is a poorly named feature.  But that's the least of it's problems.
There is no standard way to document features.  General good practice now is to
make sure your features are additive, but it's not enforced at all.  Generally,
they are also undiscoverable - they don't show up on crates.io or docs.rs.
Usually, I have to go to a crates source code and read their Cargo.toml to see
what is even an option, and than guess as to what it does.

I think features should be deprecated.  They only have two uses: reduce compile
time, and choose an implementation.  The reducing compile time thing should be
fixed by some mechanism to avoid compiling unused code (if that's possible).
Choosing an implementation is interesting here, because features are additive,
so they're kind of abused into an almost C-style enum.  Additionally, different
crates can request incompatible features (even when additive, because which
implementation should be compiled?). I propose that instead, we have a choice
mechanism.

**lib.rs**:

```rust
/// Choose either iterative or recursive implementation.
#[choice]
static enum ALGORITHM_CHOICE: AlgorithmChoice {
    /// Solve recursively
    Recursive,
    /// Solve iteratively
    Iterative,
}

/// Greatest Common Divisor.
pub fn gcd(mut a: u32, mut b: u32) -> u32 {
    match ALGORITHM_CHOICE {
        AlgorithmChoice::Recursive => {
            if a == 0 { 
                return b;
            } else if b == 0 {
                return a;
            }
            let new_b = a % b;
            a = b;
            if new_b == 0 {
                a
            } else {
                gcd(a, new_b)
            }
        }
        AlgorithmChoice::Iterative => {
            if a == 0 {
                return b;
            } else if b == 0 {
                return a;
            }
            loop {
                a %= b;
                if a == 0 {
                    return b;
                }
                b %= a;
                if b == 0 {
                    return a;
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

This would show up on docs.rs in it's own section.  And if the crate is included
in the dependency tree more than once with different choices, then it should
compile the function separately for each choice - that way crates can't
interfere with other crate's dependencies as a sibling node in the dependency
tree (which they currently can with features).

# Error Handling
I don't think this is much of a problem in it's current state, and I know
there's some talk about adding some syntactic sugar.  But, we could probably all
be fine with a macro in the `core` library:

```rust
sum!(NewError, ErrorA, ErrorB);
sum!(CombinedError, NewError, ErrorC);
```

where all types are `enum`s.  Expanding to something like:

```
#[sum]
enum NewError {
    ErrorA(ErrorA),
    ErrorB(ErrorB),
}

#[sum]
enum CombinedError {
    ErrorA(ErrorA),
    ErrorB(ErrorB),
    ErrorC(ErrorC),
}
```

This would likely be a fancy proc macro, using the `#[sum]` attribute to allow
un-nesting functionality.  This is the only thing I feel I've been missing from
error handling in Rust (without error crates as dependencies), but I might be
alone on this one.  Other proposals I've seen have been quite complicated, and I
think the language is complicated enough already.

# Const Generics
[Rust issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/44580)

It would be nice to be able to provide an API as I've wanted to do before:

```rust
StackVec<4, T>::new();
```

# Crates.io
I think crates.io should borrow some cool features from lib.rs.  Although, I
think the most popular libraries may not always be what's best for your specific
use case (as lib.rs implies).  I think it would make life easier for all Rust
programmers if there was a page on crates.io that helps you find what dependency
you need.  I don't think I have the answer on how to accomplish this, but I
think even a graphical form of
[awesome-rust](https://github.com/rust-unofficial/awesome-rust) on the home
page of crates.io would be a huge improvement.

# Single-threaded executor
The standard library should include a function to simply run a future on the
current thread.  I wrote something similar for my
[pasts](https://docs.rs/pasts/0.4.0/src/pasts/cvar_exec.rs.html) crate.

# Standard SIMD
[Rust issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2948)

The standard library should include safe types like `u32x4` that work on all
supported architectures.

# Target Support
I want to see AVR support be pushed to stable, so I can do some side projects!
Why?  Because as a college student up to this point I have received 5 free
arduinos (2 megas, 2 unos and a pololu-raspberry pi hat thing that is
arduino-compatible), and I would like to use them as a way to get into more
embedded development in Rust.

# Conclusion
I don't think it's necessary to get all of these things out for Rust 2021, but I
think for edition-breaking-changes should be made to allow these to be added in
minor version updates in the future.  Thanks for reading!

> *Feel free to email me any questions, corrections in grammar, spelling or*
> *technical errors at*
> *[jeronlau@plopgrizzly.com](mailto:jeronlau@plopgrizzly.com).*
